src/help.md, before:

title: MailTo Workflow Help
author: Dean Jackson <deanishe@deanishe.net>
date: 2014-10-10

Alfred-MailTo
=============

A Workflow for [Alfred 2][alfred].

Quickly select recipients from your Mac's Contacts database and send them to
your email client of choice. Also works with Groups/Distribution Lists.

![](../assets/demo.gif)

## Contents ##

- [Usage](#usage)
    - [All options](#all-options)
- [Email clients](#email-clients)
    - [Supported email clients](#supported-email-clients)
    - [Unsupported clients](#unsupported-clients)
- [Supported account types](#supported-account-types)
    - [Google Contacts](#google-contacts)
- [Fluid apps](#fluid-apps)
- [Updates](#updates)
- [Bugs, feature requests, suggestions](#bugs-feature-requests-suggestions)
- [Thanks, licensing etc.](#thanks-licensing-etc)


## Usage [usage] ##

**Note:** The first time you run MailTo, you will probably be asked to grant
access to your Contacts. Obviously enough, if you refuse access, MailTo won't
work.

### Quickstart ###

Use the `@` keyword in Alfred to access MailTo and search your Mac's Address
Book.

Recipients will be suggested from matching contacts and groups in the
[accounts](#supported-account-types) configured in your `Contacts` app.
Hit `⇥` to autocomplete the recipient list from the selected result, or `↩`
or `⌘+NUM` to add the address to the recipient list and start composing a mail.

You can add multiple recipients by adding a comma between them.

Use `mailto` to view/change settings.

### All options [all-options] ###

- `@ <query>` — Search your Contacts by name, nickname, email address. The
  search is fairly smart and will match "bs" to "Bob Smith". You can also enter
  email addresses that aren't in your Contacts.
    - `⇥` — Add selected contact to list of recipients and search for another
      contact.
    - `↩` or `⌘+NUM` — Add selected contact to list of recipients and send to
      your email client.
- `mailto [<query>]` — Show and edit configuration.
    - `Force Reload` — `↩` to force MailTo to update its cache of your
      contacts and email clients on your system. By default, MailTo will cache
      your contacts for one hour and the list of email clients on your system
      for one day. See [cache updates](#cache-updates) for more information.
    - `Email Client: …` — Displays your currently selected email client.
      By default, MailTo uses your default system client, but you can change
      to any app on your system that supports the `mailto:` protocol. `↩` to
      view and search a list of your apps and `↩` again to select one.
    - `Format: (Name & Email | Email Only)` — How MailTo sends the list of
      recipients to your email client. Default is `Name & Email`, whereby
      MailTo will use email addresses only if the selected client is known
      not to support names in `mailto:` URIs (see
      [Supported email clients](#supported-email-clients)). `↩` to toggle
      between the two formats.
    - `Update Notifications: (ON | OFF)` — If `ON` (the default), MailTo will
      show a notice of any available update at the top of its search results
      list. If `OFF`, you'll have to go into the Configuration (`mailto`) to
      see if a new version is available. `↩` to toggle on/off.
    - `Help Text: (ON | OFF)` — If `ON` (the default), additional help text
      will be shown in the item subtitles in Alfred. Turning off will make
      MailTo look a bit cleaner. `↩` to toggle on/off.
    - `View MailTo Help` — `↩` to open the MailTo help file in your browser.


## Email clients [email-clients] ##

In *theory*, any email client should work, as MailTo uses a
[`mailto:`][mailto-scheme] URI to call your email client.

In *practice*, support for `mailto:` varies widely between clients. Pretty
much any client will accept a URI containing only email addresses, but many
choke if the URI also contains recipients' names, e.g.
`Bob Jones <bob.jones@example.com>` instead of just `bob.jones@example.com`.

Things rapidly go downhill when addressee names contain non-ASCII letters or
commas.

MailTo knows how to handle all the clients listed below and will automatically
generate URIs containing only email addresses (no names) if the client in know
to choke on them.

If your email weapon-of-choice isn't working properly, try forcing MailTo to
use email addresses only (enter `mailto` in Alfred and toggle `Format` to
`Email Only` in MailTo Configuration), and [file a bug report][github-issues] or
submit a [pull request][github-pulls].

### Supported email clients [supported-email-clients] ###

The following email clients currently work "out of the box":

- Apple Mail
- Sparrow
- Thunderbird
- Postbox
- Airmail (email addresses only)
- Unibox
- MailMate
- Mailbox Beta (email addresses only)
- Google Chrome (if you've [set a handler][chrome-handlers])
- Fluid single-session browsers (see [note](#fluid-apps))

### Unsupported clients [unsupported-clients] ###

The following do **not** work:

- Safari (it will open your system default mail client instead)

## Supported account types [supported-account-types] ##

MailTo uses the [official Address Book API][ab-api] to read your contacts.

The following account types are *definitely* supported:

- Local contacts
- iCloud contacts
- Google contacts (see [below](#google-contacts))

I don't know about any other account types, as I don't have any to test
MailTo with…

(If anyone knows how to get an LDAP server working with Contacts.app, please
drop [me][deanishe] a line.)

### Google Contacts [google-contacts] ###

Groups are currently not synced properly between Google accounts and
Contacts.app. Groups created in Contacts.app in a Google account become a
single, empty contact in your Google Contacts; groups in Google Contacts
are ignored by Contacts.app.

This is a limitation of the Contacts.app–Google Contacts integration, not
of MailTo.


## Fluid apps [fluid-apps] ##

[Fluid][fluidapp] is an application that turns web applications into native
applications. It generates so-called "single-session browsers", which are
basically browser apps designed to visit only one website.

By default, all Fluid-generated apps can handle `mailto:` URIs (and will show
up in MailTo's list of email clients), but only via Gmail (which is
pre-configured by Fluid).

To add a different webmail service, first you need to figure out the URL to
send the email address(es) to.


### Roundcube webmail ###

For a [Roundcube][roundcube] installation, it would be something like:

`https://mail.example.com/?_task=mail&_action=compose&to=`

Once you've got your URL, open your Fluid app's Preferences and go to `URL
Handler Preferences`. Add a new group for your webmail service and add the
pattern `mailto:*`. Then copy the JavaScript from the `Gmail > mailto:*`
script box into your own `mailto:*` handler's box. Finally, change the
URL in the `outURLString` line to your own webmail's URL. For a Roundcube
installation, it'd look like this:

```javascript
function transform(inURLString) {
    inURLString = inURLString.replace('mailto:', '');
    inURLString = inURLString.replace('&amp;', '&');

    var argStr = '';
    var splits = inURLString.split('?');

    var emailAddr = null;
    var args = {};
    if (splits.length > 0) emailAddr = splits[0];
    if (splits.length > 1) argStr = splits[1];

    var outURLString = 'https://mail.example.com/?_task=mail&_action=compose&to=' + emailAddr;

    if (argStr.length > 0) outURLString += '&' + argStr;
    return outURLString;
}
```

Don't forget to deactivate (uncheck) the `Gmail` `mailto:*` script!


## Updates ##

MailTo has a built-in updater and will offer to update itself via GitHub if a
newer version is available.

You can [turn off update notifications][all-options] if you prefer (by default,
MailTo will show an update notification in your results list).

If you use the [Packal Updater][packal-updater], you should turn off update
notifications and leave the updating to the Packal Updater. An update
notification will still be shown in the configuration screen (keyword `mailto`),
but it's much easier to avoid selecting that one by accident.

Packal adds additional metadata to the workflows it distributes to enable
updates. This metadata is missing in the GitHub version, so the Packal Updater
will no longer update MailTo for you until you reinstall it from Packal.


## Bugs, feature requests, suggestions [bugs-feature-requests-suggestions] ##

Please report any bugs and submit any feature requests via
[GitHub issues][github-issues] or in the thread on the
[Alfred Forum][forum-thread].


## Thanks, licensing etc. [thanks-licensing-etc] ##

- The MailTo code is released under the [MIT licence][mit-licence].
- MailTo is heavily based on [Alfred-Workflow][alfred-workflow], also
  released under the [MIT licence][mit-licence] and also by [me][deanishe].
- The icons are almost all from [Dave Gandy][dave-gandy]'s
  [Font Awesome][font-awesome] ([SIL Open Font License][sil-licence]) via
  [Seth Lilly][seth-lilly]'s also awesome
  [Font Awesome Symbols for Sketch][font-awesome-sketch]
  ([MIT licence][mit-licence]). Any icons that are not from Font Awesome, you
  may do with as you please.



[alfred]: http://www.alfredapp.com/
[mit-licence]: http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT
[font-awesome]: http://fortawesome.github.io/Font-Awesome/
[font-awesome-sketch]: https://github.com/sethlilly/Font-Awesome-Symbols-for-Sketch
[sil-licence]: http://scripts.sil.org/OFL
[dave-gandy]: http://twitter.com/davegandy
[seth-lilly]: http://twitter.com/sethlilly
[deanishe]: http://twitter.com/deanishe
[alfred-workflow]: https://github.com/deanishe/alfred-workflow/
[mailto-scheme]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mailto
[github-issues]: https://github.com/deanishe/alfred-mailto/issues
[github-pulls]: https://github.com/deanishe/alfred-mailto/pulls
[fluidapp]: http://fluidapp.com/
[roundcube]: http://roundcube.net/
[forum-thread]: http://www.alfredforum.com/topic/3345-mailto-select-contacts-and-compose-in-your-favourite-email-app/
[packal-page]: http://www.packal.org/workflow/mailto
[github-releases]: https://github.com/deanishe/alfred-mailto/releases/latest
[packal-updater]: http://www.packal.org/workflow/packal-updater
[ab-api]: https://developer.apple.com/library/mac/documentation/UserExperience/Conceptual/AddressBook/AddressBook.html
[chrome-handlers]: https://support.google.com/chrome/answer/1382847?hl=en

Commit message:

Add download instructions to help file

src/help.md, after:

title: MailTo Workflow Help
author: Dean Jackson <deanishe@deanishe.net>
date: 2014-10-10

Alfred-MailTo
=============

A Workflow for [Alfred 2][alfred].

Quickly select recipients from your Mac's Contacts database and send them to
your email client of choice. Also works with Groups/Distribution Lists.

![](../assets/demo.gif)

## Contents ##

- [Download and installation](#download-and-installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
    - [All options](#all-options)
- [Email clients](#email-clients)
    - [Supported email clients](#supported-email-clients)
    - [Unsupported clients](#unsupported-clients)
- [Supported account types](#supported-account-types)
    - [Google Contacts](#google-contacts)
- [Fluid apps](#fluid-apps)
- [Updates](#updates)
- [Bugs, feature requests, suggestions](#bugs-feature-requests-suggestions)
- [Thanks, licensing etc.](#thanks-licensing-etc)


## Download and installation [download-and-installation] ##

You can install MailTo either from [GitHub releases][github-releases] or
[the Packal website][packal-page].

Install by double-clicking `MailTo.alfredworkflow`.


## Usage [usage] ##

**Note:** The first time you run MailTo, you will probably be asked to grant
access to your Contacts. Obviously enough, if you refuse access, MailTo won't
work.


### Quickstart ###

Use the `@` keyword in Alfred to access MailTo and search your Mac's Address
Book.

Recipients will be suggested from matching contacts and groups in the
[accounts](#supported-account-types) configured in your `Contacts` app.
Hit `⇥` to autocomplete the recipient list from the selected result, or `↩`
or `⌘+NUM` to add the address to the recipient list and start composing a mail.

You can add multiple recipients by adding a comma between them.

Use `mailto` to view/change settings.


### All options [all-options] ###

- `@ <query>` — Search your Contacts by name, nickname, email address. The
  search is fairly smart and will match "bs" to "Bob Smith". You can also enter
  email addresses that aren't in your Contacts.
    - `⇥` — Add selected contact to list of recipients and search for another
      contact.
    - `↩` or `⌘+NUM` — Add selected contact to list of recipients and send to
      your email client.
- `mailto [<query>]` — Show and edit configuration.
    - `Force Reload` — `↩` to force MailTo to update its cache of your
      contacts and email clients on your system. By default, MailTo will cache
      your contacts for one hour and the list of email clients on your system
      for one day. See [cache updates](#cache-updates) for more information.
    - `Email Client: …` — Displays your currently selected email client.
      By default, MailTo uses your default system client, but you can change
      to any app on your system that supports the `mailto:` protocol. `↩` to
      view and search a list of your apps and `↩` again to select one.
    - `Format: (Name & Email | Email Only)` — How MailTo sends the list of
      recipients to your email client. Default is `Name & Email`, whereby
      MailTo will use email addresses only if the selected client is known
      not to support names in `mailto:` URIs (see
      [Supported email clients](#supported-email-clients)). `↩` to toggle
      between the two formats.
    - `Update Notifications: (ON | OFF)` — If `ON` (the default), MailTo will
      show a notice of any available update at the top of its search results
      list. If `OFF`, you'll have to go into the Configuration (`mailto`) to
      see if a new version is available. `↩` to toggle on/off.
    - `Help Text: (ON | OFF)` — If `ON` (the default), additional help text
      will be shown in the item subtitles in Alfred. Turning off will make
      MailTo look a bit cleaner. `↩` to toggle on/off.
    - `View MailTo Help` — `↩` to open the MailTo help file in your browser.


## Email clients [email-clients] ##

In *theory*, any email client should work, as MailTo uses a
[`mailto:`][mailto-scheme] URI to call your email client.

In *practice*, support for `mailto:` varies widely between clients. Pretty
much any client will accept a URI containing only email addresses, but many
choke if the URI also contains recipients' names, e.g.
`Bob Jones <bob.jones@example.com>` instead of just `bob.jones@example.com`.

Things rapidly go downhill when addressee names contain non-ASCII letters or
commas.

MailTo knows how to handle all the clients listed below and will automatically
generate URIs containing only email addresses (no names) if the client is known
to choke on them.

If your email weapon-of-choice isn't working properly, try forcing MailTo to
use email addresses only (enter `mailto` in Alfred and toggle `Format` to
`Email Only` in MailTo Configuration), and [file a bug report][github-issues] or
submit a [pull request][github-pulls].


### Supported email clients [supported-email-clients] ###

The following email clients currently work "out of the box":

- Apple Mail
- Sparrow
- Thunderbird
- Postbox
- Airmail (email addresses only)
- Unibox
- MailMate
- Mailbox Beta (email addresses only)
- Google Chrome (if you've [set a handler][chrome-handlers])
- Fluid single-session browsers (see [note](#fluid-apps))


### Unsupported clients [unsupported-clients] ###

The following do **not** work:

- Safari (it will open your system default mail client instead)


## Supported account types [supported-account-types] ##

MailTo uses the [official Address Book API][ab-api] to read your contacts.

The following account types are *definitely* supported:

- Local contacts
- iCloud contacts
- Google contacts (see [below](#google-contacts))

I don't know about any other account types, as I don't have any to test
MailTo with…

(If anyone knows how to get an LDAP server working with Contacts.app, please
drop [me][deanishe] a line.)


### Google Contacts [google-contacts] ###

Groups are currently not synced properly between Google accounts and
Contacts.app. Groups created in Contacts.app in a Google account become a
single, empty contact in your Google Contacts; groups in Google Contacts
are ignored by Contacts.app.

This is a limitation of the Contacts.app–Google Contacts integration, not
of MailTo.


## Fluid apps [fluid-apps] ##

[Fluid][fluidapp] is an application that turns web applications into native
applications. It generates so-called "single-session browsers", which are
basically browser apps designed to visit only one website.

By default, all Fluid-generated apps can handle `mailto:` URIs (and will show
up in MailTo's list of email clients), but only via Gmail (which is
pre-configured by Fluid).

To add a different webmail service, first you need to figure out the URL to
send the email address(es) to.


### Roundcube webmail ###

For a [Roundcube][roundcube] installation, it would be something like:

`https://mail.example.com/?_task=mail&_action=compose&to=`

Once you've got your URL, open your Fluid app's Preferences and go to `URL
Handler Preferences`. Add a new group for your webmail service and add the
pattern `mailto:*`. Then copy the JavaScript from the `Gmail > mailto:*`
script box into your own `mailto:*` handler's box. Finally, change the
URL in the `outURLString` line to your own webmail's URL. For a Roundcube
installation, it'd look like this:

```javascript
function transform(inURLString) {
    inURLString = inURLString.replace('mailto:', '');
    inURLString = inURLString.replace('&amp;', '&');

    var argStr = '';
    var splits = inURLString.split('?');

    var emailAddr = null;
    var args = {};
    if (splits.length > 0) emailAddr = splits[0];
    if (splits.length > 1) argStr = splits[1];

    var outURLString = 'https://mail.example.com/?_task=mail&_action=compose&to=' + emailAddr;

    if (argStr.length > 0) outURLString += '&' + argStr;
    return outURLString;
}
```

Don't forget to deactivate (uncheck) the `Gmail` `mailto:*` script!


## Updates ##

MailTo has a built-in updater and will offer to update itself via GitHub if a
newer version is available.

You can [turn off update notifications][all-options] if you prefer (by default,
MailTo will show an update notification in your results list).

If you use the [Packal Updater][packal-updater], you should turn off update
notifications and leave the updating to the Packal Updater. An update
notification will still be shown in the configuration screen (keyword `mailto`),
but it's much easier to avoid selecting that one by accident.

Packal adds additional metadata to the workflows it distributes to enable
updates. This metadata is missing in the GitHub version, so the Packal Updater
will no longer update MailTo for you until you reinstall it from Packal.


## Bugs, feature requests, suggestions [bugs-feature-requests-suggestions] ##

Please report any bugs and submit any feature requests via
[GitHub issues][github-issues] or in the thread on the
[Alfred Forum][forum-thread].


## Thanks, licensing etc. [thanks-licensing-etc] ##

- The MailTo code is released under the [MIT licence][mit-licence].
- MailTo is heavily based on [Alfred-Workflow][alfred-workflow], also
  released under the [MIT licence][mit-licence] and also by [me][deanishe].
- The icons are almost all from [Dave Gandy][dave-gandy]'s
  [Font Awesome][font-awesome] ([SIL Open Font License][sil-licence]) via
  [Seth Lilly][seth-lilly]'s also awesome
  [Font Awesome Symbols for Sketch][font-awesome-sketch]
  ([MIT licence][mit-licence]). Any icons that are not from Font Awesome, you
  may do with as you please.



[alfred]: http://www.alfredapp.com/
[mit-licence]: http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT
[font-awesome]: http://fortawesome.github.io/Font-Awesome/
[font-awesome-sketch]: https://github.com/sethlilly/Font-Awesome-Symbols-for-Sketch
[sil-licence]: http://scripts.sil.org/OFL
[dave-gandy]: http://twitter.com/davegandy
[seth-lilly]: http://twitter.com/sethlilly
[deanishe]: http://twitter.com/deanishe
[alfred-workflow]: https://github.com/deanishe/alfred-workflow/
[mailto-scheme]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mailto
[github-issues]: https://github.com/deanishe/alfred-mailto/issues
[github-pulls]: https://github.com/deanishe/alfred-mailto/pulls
[fluidapp]: http://fluidapp.com/
[roundcube]: http://roundcube.net/
[forum-thread]: http://www.alfredforum.com/topic/3345-mailto-select-contacts-and-compose-in-your-favourite-email-app/
[packal-page]: http://www.packal.org/workflow/mailto
[github-releases]: https://github.com/deanishe/alfred-mailto/releases/latest
[packal-updater]: http://www.packal.org/workflow/packal-updater
[ab-api]: https://developer.apple.com/library/mac/documentation/UserExperience/Conceptual/AddressBook/AddressBook.html
[chrome-handlers]: https://support.google.com/chrome/answer/1382847?hl=en
